my name is John Glenville and I
specialize in treating anxiety in OCD
and in this short video I would like to
share with you some of the patterns and
knowledge that I've gathered whilst
helping hundreds of people including
myself to understand then interrupt and
finally let go of OCD and it's
Associated fears worries anxieties and
silly games we will delve deeper into
the way OCD operates so you can have a
clearer understanding of what's
happening to you and therefore when
you're ready to tackle the OCD head on
you'll be better informed of just what
you're dealing with because OCD really
is a sneaky little creature I won't be
saying pull yourself together and I
won't be saying can't you see how silly
this is because we already know that so
what's OCD obsessive compulsive disorder
I don't really like that word disorder
it's more like obsessive compulsive
order because there's no disorder in OCD
in fact it's quite the opposite most
things are unbelievably planned thought
through and very orderly I sometimes
call it cood carefully orchestrated
dilemas anyway a popular medical
definition for OCD is OCD is a common
chronic and long-lasting disorder in
which a person has uncontrollable
reoccurring thoughts obsessions and
behaviors compulsions that he or she
feels the urge to repeat over and over
and yeah that seems okay however I think
we need to add how it affects the
experiences life their health their
happiness their emotional stability
their selfworth their energy uh how it
affects their work how it disrupts their
relationships it truly can unsettle a
person's life now OCD is part of the
anxiety group of mental health issues
and I'm not going to go into too much
depth about anxiety in this video
however there's lots of information on
my website about anxiety it is very
important though to be aware that the
management of anxiety at a core level
will need to be initially addressed so
so that the subsequent phasing out of
this secondary condition which we call
OCD is actually possible then we need to
ask ourselves is OCD the problem or the
symptom he checking that the door is
locked a symptom of something else or a
problem in its own right and of course
the answer is it's both however most
people focus on stopping the behavior
and not identifying with the underlying
source of that behavior and we often
lose track of what has become the norm
rather than what started all off in the
first place face which may have been
many many years
ago and when observed from my own
experience OCD breaks down into four key
areas first group are the intrusive
thoughts that often lead to obsessive
ways of thinking and these May range
from simple self-doubts right through to
horrific unwanted thoughts about harming
people or all sorts of different things
and secondly we have the compulsions and
these are the mental bodily or
behavioral rituals that we feel we must
must carry out to lessen our anxiety or
to calm us down or to stop something
else happening then thirdly we must
acknowledge that OCD tends to make us
very controlling individuals controlling
of people situations outcomes to ensure
that we can control and avoid the
anxiety triggers or to manage our
rituals and and often we can't see this
control but it's very obvious to other
people and these controlling strategies
may be overt such as getting angry at
someone to to make the person comply or
quite covert such as saying oh I'll just
stay in you go out I'll be fine where
guilt is used to control others and then
we may even feel guilty for doing it in
the first place then comes the
strategies that we may need to run that
allow us to cover up our habits for
example someone might say if I get to
work early then nobody will see me
disinfect my desk and disinfect my phone
or they may say well they may think if
I'm shy and quiet people won't ask me to
do things
so let's dig deeper into these four
headlines starting with the obsessive
and intrusive thoughts let's explore
some of the more common ways OCD hits us
with involuntary thoughts and obsessions
and remember this just because you had a
thought doesn't mean you made it it
doesn't even mean that it actually means
anything your brain is just a very
clever thought proposal device and we
all have some unsolicited thoughts from
time to time that are silly or weird uh
and most people they just ignore them
for example it's pretty often people
have a little thought that comes into
head says what if I just kill myself and
these people they just seem to watch
that thought arise they watch it and
then they just let it go they don't take
it personally or they don't give it any
deep meaning it was just an unsolicited
thought however when we experience OCD
we have a lot more Uninvited thoughts
that cover a wide spectrum of topics and
fearful dilemmas know typical examples
are what if I harm someone did I did I
hit that cyclist whilst I was driving
did I poison that cup of tea I gave to
that person are those people follow me
did I lock the house what if I harm my
baby does that pain in my stomach mean I
have cancer and as these intrusive
thoughts become more common more
repetitive the fears that they engender
seem to become more and more real and
more and more Relentless and it's scary
and it's exhausting and to combat these
scarily real but unrequested obsessive
thoughts we might stumble upon strange
habits
which may often become compulsions that
provide a temporary rest bite or a
distraction from the anxiety and the
fear and the compulsions in and of
themselves are quite irrelevant whether
you have to count everything three times
or line up all your Tins in a Cupboard
or put your left shoe on first these are
just Strange Behaviors that you've
picked up to help you control your
anxiety and Please be aware that if
you're trying to overcome your OCD by
solely focusing on overcoming these
compulsions yeah you you're missing the
point the compulsions are just a symptom
of the anxiety plus even if you learn to
manage a particular compulsion your
unconscious mind will just morph it into
another differing
compulsion this is why the three most
important things to work on when you be
ready for change is number one
separating you from your thoughts the
thoughts are in you but they're not you
you're not asking for them they don't
mean anything secondly understanding and
managing the underlying anxiety and then
the third thing is to spend more time
being calm so that you can recalibrate
your
emotions if we look at some of the more
common compulsions rituals and thoughts
and
behaviors the actual list is is is truly
endless the human unconscious mind can
with the logic of a child get you to
believe and do almost anything maybe
pause the pause the video just now and
take a moment to have a
look either way it's exhausting just
looking at all the ways we can trap and
scare ourselves and as I said before
these are the symptoms of the underlying
anxiety and it's there where your focus
needs to be placed if you really want
big change if we look at covering it all
up it can be exhausting to cover up your
anxiety to cover up all the the
behavioral ticks and rituals you have to
perform um and what I've noticed over
the years is people fall into a few
categories the first category I call the
stay-at-home prisoner and for something
individuals who have experienced OCD
issues around germs infection blood and
cleanliness the idea of working in
shared offices or visiting shopping
centers or public areas or even taking
children to school where there's so many
germs and colds and things uh it becomes
fearful and distressing therefore it
becomes easier to stay at home in a
sanitized
environment then we have the technical
looners this group learn how to manage
their ruminations and compulsions by
losing themselves in dist extracting
thought processes or complex mental
tasks like science-based activities or
technical careers where they can often
just work alone or in small groups uh
and they often attract partners are also
very technical or happy to live in a
more enclosed and and structured living
environment one of my favorite groups
are the self-employed controllers and
for some it's just so much easier to
manage their OCD compulsions by working
for themselves and I've always been
amazed at how many business owners have
varying degrees of compulsive behaviors
and scary intrusive thoughts and not
only do they work for themselves they
usually only have one or two employees
or they employ family members to assist
them this way they can still earn a
living and they can more easily cover up
their compulsions uh and they can do it
in the privacy of their own office and
if their office is in their home all the
better the next group are called the get
on with it anyway pragmatists and I
think this is by far the biggest group
and in some ways they have the hardest
time because they're always trying to
face their fears and just get on with it
in other ways they're the most free of
the group because they can kind of
function despite the OCD and this group
will find that their compulsions and
ruminations will increase with stress
and disruption therefore holidays and
Christmas and job interviews and dating
travel surprise events they they can be
times of great anxiety and very very
mentally
exhausting now one of the things I
mentioned earlier is that OCD is a
subset of anxiety therefore if you're
going to overcome your OCD first you
need to understand the headlines about
anxiety and how it
operates and anxiety rule number one is
you can't think your way out of anxiety
anxiety is in fact a problem of thinking
too much and because your body responds
to your thoughts as if they were true
your body becomes very tired and very
exhausted anxiety rule number two
anxiety uncons consciously tries to make
you stay at home and nearly all forms of
anxiety try to unconsciously make the
experience that stay at home or to go
back home where they'll feel safer or at
least less unsafe and OCD is no
exception the way your unconscious does
this is to look for any underlying fears
that you have probably learned in
childhood and then it plays on them a
simple way to look at this might be to
say that the unconscious nervous system
becomes very tired very exhausted from
long periods of being anxious and it
doesn't like this and it wants to be
able to relax and recharge and it
assumes with only the logic of a
10-year-old that if you stay at home
you'll recover you'll get better however
this only works if you stay at home and
you stop thinking and most people with
OCD they stay at home and then they
think even more which ties them out even
more and thus the cycle just repeats
itself around and around these
unconscious sabotage and compulsions can
be sorted into five categories and
typically any anxiety sufferer has
symptoms from at least a couple of these
categories the first unconscious
hijacking class is travel here the
anxiety heightens the further you travel
away from home so for example flying
driving on motorways going on trains um
and the logic here is very simple when
viewed from your unconscious mind which
is quite childlike it's if I give him a
panic attack on an airplane he'll stop
Flying and he'll stay at home it's quite
simple when you look at it from these
perspectives the second class of
unconscious hijacking is your health and
your unconscious mind in association
with your unconscious nervous system can
use your health in three main ways to
scare you and to frighten you into
staying at home firstly it can make you
ill it can give you serious diseases we
know this for a fact secondly the mind
can present you with psychosomatic
illnesses like headaches and eczema
chronic fatigue faue IBS me fibromyalgia
where there's no actual disease but
there is an illness and that illness has
real physical symptoms which often make
you stay at home and then finally in
this group there's hypochondria where
the person fears every little a compaign
and needs constant reassurance that
they'll be okay they hate being left
alone and this leads to them not being
able to work so they stay at home can
you see how these patterns start to form
um Category 3 is unconsciously
sabotaging your work and here your
unconscious wants you to be at home and
not at work so it unconsciously
sabotages you and you end up doing
really really silly things at work and
if someone says why did you do that you
say I don't know but you just keep doing
them category 4 is the same thing but
sabotaging
relationships and it takes a lot of
energy and a lot of compromise to be in
a relationship however OCD doesn't like
to compromise therefore it's very common
for anxious people to unconsciously
sabotage their close relationships with
things like anger or Affairs or too be
too controlling or very rude rude
comments uh and unconsciously they try
to end the relationship so that they can
stay at home and be realigned with their
OCD
propensities these are unconscious
strategies that run underneath your
conscious radar and the last category is
sabotaging your social life this means
getting anxious around friends or in
Intimate social events
or becoming afraid in Social places like
Cinemas shopping centers busy streets
and once again the logic is simple if
she goes out of the house I'll scare her
and then she'll go home and when you
look at OCD from this perspective you
can see why it takes such a long time to
get ready to leave the house and then to
lock the house and then once you're out
of the house you have to control
everything until you can get back home
again let's talk about some sensible
mindsets that you can develop that will
help you when you're ready to look at
some sort of sort of recovery program
with the right help and the right
attitude and enough time I believe that
most people can get their OCD to a very
manageable state or even overcome it
it's not easy but it is possible so here
are 10 things to consider when you're
ready to do something about your
OCD tip number one OCD is not a disease
you weren't born with it you didn't
catch it it's a complex combination of
thoughts feelings and behaviors that
have un consciously program the brain
and the body and with the right help it
can usually be
unprogrammed tip number two most of the
things that need change in are held
unconsciously or you might call it
subconsciously which means they're
involuntary therefore you can't
consciously think your way out of OCD
logical thinking makes it
worse tip number three your compulsions
are a symptom not the problem although
they do cause problems you need help to
address the underlying fear of being
anxious before the compulsions can be
worked on tip number four you are not
your thoughts the brain is just an organ
that coordinates and proposes thoughts
they aren't truths and just watch the
thoughts just observe the thoughts as
they arise and don't give them any
meaning tip number five your unconscious
mind uses the logic of a child to try to
keep you safe for example it thinks if
he stays in his room then nothing bad
will happen
this is the simple logic that you need
to apply to all of OCD behaviors and
then they begin to make a little bit
more sense if she panics on the motorway
then she won't go
out tip number six don't wait for
motivation to come before you get help
motivation is an emotion and your
emotions are currently not working
properly just get started
anyway tip number seven who will you be
and what will you do differently when
you no longer have OCD and do you have
the skills required to do that how can
you acquire them is there a secondary
gain by having OCD does having an OCD
stop you from having to Face Reality an
interesting thing you might want to go
on Google and search the the word
secondary gain it's an interesting
topic tip eight OCD makes you doubt
everything therefore you need a process
to follow that guides you step by step
through your recovery or you'll begin to
doubt trus in yourself to do it
tip nine are your family or caregivers
unknowingly keeping you stuck by
pampering to your needs or not knowing
properly how anxiety and OCD operates
therefore giving you poor advice and tip
number 10 you probably will need some
form of professional guidance and
therapy to release unconscious habits to
release past trauma and to change any
self-limiting beliefs that you've
developed uh and I would just say make
sure you choose a person who really
understands anxiety as in my experience
very few people
do I hope this short video has given you
some New Perspectives to consider and to
better understand your condition if you
found it useful please like it or share
it on social media and feel free to
forward this link to anybody you know
who's battling with OCD or anxiety and
there's lots more information on my
website at www.j